---
layout: post
title: A guide to Ruby in ten lines of code
tags:
  - code
  - ruby
---


This is a slightly unorthodox introduction guide to the Ruby language. Through this guide we will examine just ten one-line snippets of code, and discover a lot of features from each of them.

This is the post version of a talk I gave for [LibreIM](https://libreim.github.io).

## Syntax

```ruby
puts "Hello #{gets.strip}!"
```

This snippet accepts a string from standard input, then cleans the leading and trailing spacing characters and embeds it in a greeting which is shown on standard output. Notice that:
- `puts` and `gets` are the standard functions for displaying messages and reading input, respectively.
- You can omit parenthesis around parameters for better readability.
- `#{...}` in strings interprets small pieces of code and transforms the output into a string.

```ruby
puts "boooored".upcase unless Time.now.saturday?
```

This example is so readable you probably don't need a description. Notice that:
- Literals are Ruby objects and can receive methods.
- `if`, `unless`, `while` and `until` can be used as one-line structures.
- There is a convention to end methods which return booleans with `?` and methods which have non-explicit side effects with `!`.

```ruby
real, imag = (1 + 3i).rectangular
```

This snippet assigns the real part of 1 + 3i to `real` and the imaginary part to `imag`. Notice that:
- Ruby has built-in support for complex numbers, big numbers (as in symbolic, bigger than `long long` numbers) and symbolic rationals.
- Assignment allows splatting arrays. The splat operator `*` allows for related operations. For example,
    ```ruby
x, *xs = [1, 2, 3, 4]
    ```
    performs some Haskell-ish pattern matching: `x` receives the first element and `xs` holds the rest of the array. There is also a similar double-splat `**` for hashes.

## Object oriented programming

```ruby
class DeadPlayerError < StandardError; end
```

Defines a class useful to return errors (exceptions). Notice that:
-   Classes are defined with `class` (which is syntax sugar for `Class.new { ... }`).
-   There is simple inheritance with `<`.
-   You can throw an error with `raise DeadPlayerError`. Ruby distinguishes errors, from which a program can recover, and other kinds of exceptions, which leave the program in an invalid state and therefore it must stop.

``` {.ruby}
Point = Struct.new :x, :y, :z
```

Creates a class with getters and setters for the given attributes. Notice that:
-   Member attributes of a class are **always** private (or protected, as they are inherited). Thus, the *dot* only sends methods and doesn't directly access attributes.
-   Methods can be defined in a `do ... end` block. You should consider defining a class if you want to add them.
-   New objects are created with `Point.new`.


## Iteration and data structures

```ruby
puts %w[such elegant wow].each_with_index.map { |w,i| "#{i}. #{w}" }
```

Walks through the array, obtains an array of strings *index. element* and prints it on stdout. Notice that:
-   `%w[]` splits a list of words by spaces and returns an array.
-   `each_with_index` iterates giving each element and its index in the collection.
-   `map` applies a function on each element of a collection and returns the result.
-   `{...}` o `do ... end` denote *blocks*, structures of code which are passed to methods in order to be ran from them. Blocks can receive parameters between bars `|a, b|`.

```ruby
dot = ->(v1, v2) { v1.zip(v2).reduce(0) { |p, (n, m)| p + n * m } }
```

Computes the dot product. Example usage: `dot.([1, 2, 3], [-1, 0, 2])`. Notice that:
-   Lambda functions are defined with `->`. As opposed to usual functions or methods, Lambdas are objects.
-   `zip` pairs the elements of two or more arrays.
-   `reduce` accumulates results of a binary function.

```ruby
fib = Hash.new { |h, i| h[i] = h[i - 2] + h[i - 1] }.update(0 => 0, 1 => 1)
```

Creates a Hash which contains, for each index, the corresponding term of the Fibonacci sequence. Notice that:
-   `Hash` may receive a *default* initialization (usually `nil`). This initialization takes place whenever the user attempts to access a value which has not been assigned previously.
-   `Hash#update` assigns several values at a time.
-   This would be equivalent to a memoized recursive version.

```ruby
solution.neighborhood.detect { |attempt, fitness| fitness > @current_fitness }
```

Assuming the `.neighborhood` returns a collection of possible solutions and their performance (fitness), this finds the first one which improves the current solution. Actual use: <https://git.io/vPxQ6>. Notice that:

-   `detect` receives a predicate and returns the first ellement of the collection which verifies it.
-   If you want to get the best solution in the neighborhood instead, you can use `max_by`.
-   There is a huge list of iteration methods available in any Ruby collection class:
    [`Enumerable`](https://ruby-doc.org/core-2.5.0/Enumerable.html)


## I/O

```ruby
open(DATA.read, "w").write IO.read($0).gsub(/^#' /, "")
```

This snippet reads itself (as in, the own program running), uncomments lines marked with `#'` and passes the result as input to the program started by `Kernel#open`. Notice that:
-   `$0` is the name of the current program/script.
-   `gsub` performs global sustitution
- `Kernel#open` opens read/write pipes with other processes when the "filename" looks like `"|program_name"`.

*The catch*  The program is hidden in the data section of the [original script](https://github.com/fdavidcl/ruby-ten-lines/blob/master/slides.rb):

```sh
__END__
|pandoc -t beamer -o slides.pdf --pdf-engine=xelatex
```

